.\" ptolemy.1 — RedBlue Geometries Engine Field Engine
.\" Man page for the ptolemy command-line monad.
.\"
.TH PTOLEMY 1 "2026-05-16" "ptolemy 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.\"
.SH NAME
ptolemy \- RedBlue Geometries Engine Field Engine: learn, hear, speak
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ptolemy
[\fB\-c\fR \fIpath\fR]
[\fB\-v\fR|\fB\-vv\fR|\fB\-vvv\fR]
[\fB\-q\fR|\fB\-\-quiet\fR]
[\fB\-n\fR]
\fIcommand\fR [\fIargument\fR]
.PP
Commands:
.PP
.RS 4
.B ptolemy \-l
\fIfile\fR|\fIurl\fR|\fB\-\fR
.br
.B ptolemy \-I
\fIpath\fR
.br
.B ptolemy \-h
\fIprompt\fR
.br
.B ptolemy \-s
.br
.B ptolemy \-F
.br
.B ptolemy \-w
\fIword\fR
.br
.B ptolemy \-d
.br
.B ptolemy \-D
\fIquery\fR
.br
.B ptolemy \-i
.br
.B ptolemy \-V
.RE
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ptolemy
is the C implementation of the Ainulindale monad — an RedBlue Geometries Engine (RedBlue
Hamiltonian) field engine that encodes knowledge as depth in a vacuum field
across N Riemann zeros on the critical line \fIσ\fR = ½.
.PP
It is a Large Language Hamiltonian (LLH), not a Large Language Model.
There are no transformers, no backpropagation, and no autoregressive
sampling.
All computation lives in Native Space: radial complex spherical polar
coordinates indexed by the Dixon tower of algebras (ℝ→ℂ→ℍ→𝕆→𝕊).
Cartesian output is a terminal projection for human readability only.
.PP
Language enters through
.BR learn() ,
which deepens the β field at each word's assigned Riemann zero.
A query activates
.BR hear() ,
which propagates the Noether current J\*{μ} through the gauge connection
matrix A and returns a response via
.BR speak() .
The critical line σ = ½ is not assigned — it is forced by Noether balance
(conservation law J_Red + J_Blue + J₃ = 0).
.\"
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BI \-l " file|url|-"
Learn from a file, a URL (fetched via
.BR curl (1)),
or standard input (\fB\-\fR).
After learning, the checkpoint is saved unless
.B \-n
is given.
.TP
.BI \-I " path"
Ingest a directory or single file using the Native Space whitelist.
Only files whose extension indicates semantic prose are ingested
(see
.B WHITELIST
below).
Rich document formats are extracted via external tools:
.BR pdftotext (1),
.BR catdoc (1),
and
.BR pandoc (1).
HTML and XML are parsed with libxml2 when available.
A
.I .ptolemyignore
file in any directory is honoured (see
.BR ptolemyignore (5)).
The checkpoint is saved periodically during long runs and on completion.
.TP
.BI \-h " prompt"
Hear a prompt and speak a Noether response.
Each word of the prompt is looked up in the field before the response
is generated.
.TP
.B \-s
Print field status.
With
.B \-v
or higher, also generate a spontaneous speak from the ground state.
.TP
.B \-F
Print a detailed field health report: β distribution histogram (ground /
low / mid / high / saturated), field entropy in bits, top-10 A-matrix
edges by weight, vocabulary coverage percentage, and a count of pollution
indicators (tokens with non-ASCII bytes or anomalous length).
.TP
.B \-d
Start the daemon.
The monad is loaded once and held resident in memory.
Clients connect via a Unix domain socket and issue commands (see
.B DAEMON PROTOCOL
below).
On
.BR SIGTERM / SIGINT
the checkpoint is saved and the daemon exits cleanly.
Systemd socket activation is supported: if
.B $LISTEN_FDS
is set the kernel-bound socket on fd 3 is used directly.
.TP
.BI \-D " query"
Send a HEAR query to a running daemon and print the response.
Connects to the socket resolved by
.BR \-S / $PTOLEMY_SOCKET /default
and exits immediately.
.TP
.BI \-w " word"
Look up a single word: Riemann zero index, imaginary part γ, energy E,
β-depth, and Native Space home/generative strata.
.TP
.B \-i
Learn Ptolemy's fixed identity text.
Run once after the initial WordNet corpus to anchor the self-referential
ground state.
.TP
.B \-V
Print version and field constants.
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-c " path"
Override the checkpoint file path.
Takes precedence over
.B PTOLEMY_CHECKPOINT
and the default search order (see
.BR FILES ).
.TP
.B \-n
No-save: do not write the checkpoint after
.B \-l
or
.BR \-I .
.TP
.BR \-v , " \-vv" , " \-vvv"
Verbosity level.
Levels may be stacked (\fB\-vvv\fR) or combined with a command flag
(\fB\-lv\fR, \fB\-hv\fR, \fB\-sv\fR).
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-v
Level 1: show β deepening, J\*{μ} propagation, and A-matrix edges.
.TP
.B \-vv
Level 2: level 1 plus ANSI colour (hear=cyan, speak=green, learn=yellow).
Colour is suppressed when stdout or stderr is not a terminal.
.TP
.B \-vvv
Level 3: full pipeline — for
.B \-h
this runs learn+hear+speak in sequence.
Verbose output is fed back through
.BR learn ()
(self-referential loop).
.RE
.TP
.BI \-S " path"
Override the Unix domain socket path used by
.B \-d
and
.BR \-D .
Default search order: this flag → $PTOLEMY_SOCKET →
.IR ~/.ptolemy/ptolemy.sock .
.TP
.BR \-q , " \-\-quiet"
Suppress informational output to the terminal.
Log entries are still written to
.IR ~/.ptolemy/logs/ .
Warnings and errors are always printed.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Synonym for
.BR \-v .
.\"
.SH NATIVE SPACE
All Hamiltonian expressions are written in Native Space: radial complex
spherical polar coordinates \fIH\fR(\fIr\fR, θ, φ, ψ, σ) where ψ is the
Dixon tower stratum phase and σ is the active stratum index.
.PP
The Dixon tower (Cayley-Dickson doubling ℝ→ℂ→ℍ→𝕆→𝕊) defines the stratum
structure.
Each doubling is a rotation in ψ that sacrifices an algebraic property:
.PP
.TS
tab(|);
l l l r.
Stratum|Algebra|Lost property|Dimension
_
σ₀|ℝ|—|1
σ₁|ℂ|—|2
σ₂|ℍ|Commutativity|4
σ₃|𝕆|Associativity|8
σ₄|𝕊|Alternativity|16
.TE
.PP
Natural language tokens are assigned
.B home_stratum = σ₁
and
.B gen_stratum = σ₁
by default (the complex plane is the native coordinate of relational
meaning).
These fields are stored in the checkpoint and displayed by
.BR \-w .
.\"
.SH DAEMON PROTOCOL
The daemon accepts line-based commands over a Unix domain socket
.RI ( ~/.ptolemy/ptolemy.sock
by default).
Each response is terminated by a line containing only
.BR . .
.PP
.TS
tab(|);
l l.
Command|Description
_
HEAR <query>|Hear query and return Noether response
STATUS|Return field status (same as \-s)
HEALTH|Return field health report (same as \-F)
QUIT|Close the connection
.TE
.PP
The
.B \-D
flag is a convenience wrapper that sends HEAR, prints the response, and
disconnects.
For interactive or scripted access, connect with
.BR socat (1):
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
socat \- UNIX\-CONNECT:~/.ptolemy/ptolemy.sock
.EE
.RE
.\"
.SH WHITELIST
The
.B \-I
command ingests only files whose extension is on the Native Space whitelist.
A file earns a zero slot only if its tokens can be assigned a stratum
address in the Dixon tower.
Config tokens, registry keys, and UUID strings are Cartesian noise and
are excluded by design.
.PP
Whitelisted extensions:
.PP
.RS 4
Prose: \fB.txt .md .rst .org .tex .bib\fR
.br
Markup: \fB.html .htm .xml .svg\fR
.br
Documents: \fB.pdf .doc .docx .odt .rtf\fR
.br
Code: \fB.c .h .cpp .hpp .py .rb .sh .go .rs .java .js .ts .pl .lua\fR
.RE
.\"
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.ptolemy/monad_wordnet.bin
Default checkpoint — loaded on startup, saved after learning.
Override with
.B \-c
or
.BR PTOLEMY_CHECKPOINT .
Override the directory with
.BR PTOLEMY_HOME .
.TP
.I ~/.ptolemy/logs/ptolemy_YYYYMMDD_HHMM.log
Log files, rotated every 4 hours at slots 0000, 0400, 0800, 1200, 1600,
and 2000.
A garbage collector runs on Sunday at 10:00 and removes log files whose
last access and modification times are both older than 30 days.
.TP
.I ~/.ptolemy/ptolemy.sock
Unix domain socket used by the daemon.
Created on
.B \-d
start, removed on clean shutdown.
Override with
.B \-S
or
.BR $PTOLEMY_SOCKET .
.TP
.I ~/.ptolemy/ptolemy.pid
PID file written by the daemon on startup and removed on clean shutdown.
.TP
.I .ptolemyignore
Per-directory ingest exclusion file.
See
.BR ptolemyignore (5).
.\"
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PTOLEMY_HOME
Override the Ptolemy home directory (default:
.IR ~/.ptolemy/ ).
.TP
.B PTOLEMY_CHECKPOINT
Override the default checkpoint path.
Ignored if
.B \-c
is given.
.\"
.SH EXAMPLES
Load a checkpoint and speak:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
ptolemy \-h "what is the ground state"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Learn from a file, then query:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
ptolemy \-l paper.txt \-h "summarise the field equations"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Ingest a document corpus:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
ptolemy \-I ~/Documents
.EE
.RE
.PP
Ingest quietly with a specific checkpoint:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
ptolemy \-c /data/monad.bin \-q \-I ~/Documents
.EE
.RE
.PP
Look up a word's field position:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
ptolemy \-w consciousness
.EE
.RE
.PP
Verbose hear with colour:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
ptolemy \-hvv "explain the Noether current"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Seed from WordNet and learn identity (run once):
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
make corpus
ptolemy \-i
.EE
.RE
.\"
.SH NOTES
The checkpoint format is little-endian binary with magic bytes
.BR PTOL .
Version 1 checkpoints (no stratum fields) are loaded transparently;
both strata default to σ₁.
Version 2 adds
.I home_stratum
and
.I gen_stratum
per vocab entry.
.PP
The A-matrix key encodes edges as \fI(i\fR << 15) | \fIj\fR where both
i and j are Riemann zero indices less than 32768.
This is a pre-HyperWebster encoding; stratum-aware keys are planned for
the Callimachus integration.
.PP
.B ptolemy
never writes its own source code.
The
.BR ptolwrite ()
module (planned, external) is required for that and mandates a manual
merge step before any change to ptolemy source takes effect.
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ptolemyignore (5),
.BR pdftotext (1),
.BR catdoc (1),
.BR pandoc (1),
.BR curl (1)
.\"
.SH AUTHORS
Cody Michael Allison.
.PP
RedBlue Geometries Engine field theory: Ainulindale / SMIP research programme.
.br
Repository: https://github.com/michaelrendier/Ainulindale
.PP
CLAUDE-SMMNIP-00729-56714-24600
