.\" ptolemyignore.5 — .ptolemyignore file format
.TH PTOLEMYIGNORE 5 "2026-05-16" "ptolemy 1.0.0" "File Formats"
.\"
.SH NAME
ptolemyignore \- per-directory ingest exclusion patterns for ptolemy
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I .ptolemyignore
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
When
.BR ptolemy (1)
walks a directory tree with
.BR \-I ,
it checks each directory for a file named
.IR .ptolemyignore .
Lines in this file are
.BR fnmatch (3)
patterns matched against the
.I name
of each file or directory in that directory (not the full path).
Files and directories whose names match any pattern are skipped.
.PP
Patterns apply to the immediate directory only.
Subdirectories inherit their own
.I .ptolemyignore
files independently.
.\"
.SH FORMAT
.TP
Empty lines
Ignored.
.TP
Lines beginning with \fB#\fR
Comments — ignored.
.TP
All other lines
Treated as
.BR fnmatch (3)
glob patterns matched against the entry name.
Shell-style wildcards apply:
.RS 4
.TP
.B *
Match any sequence of characters (not including
.BR / ).
.TP
.B ?
Match any single character.
.TP
.B [...]
Match any character in the bracketed set.
.RE
.\"
.SH EXAMPLES
Ignore a specific directory and all
.I .tmp
files:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
# do not ingest the archive subdirectory
archive
*.tmp
*.bak
.EE
.RE
.PP
Ignore Wine-related files left in a documents folder:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
# Wine and Steam noise
*.reg
*.lnk
steam_*
.EE
.RE
.PP
Ignore everything except PDF files (use
.B \-I
on the directory, not a global ignore):
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
# This pattern approach does not work for whitelisting —
# use ptolemy \-I on specific subdirectories instead.
.EE
.RE
.\"
.SH NOTES
The maximum number of patterns per
.I .ptolemyignore
file is 64.
Patterns longer than 511 characters are truncated.
.PP
Cascade behaviour (patterns applying to all descendant directories) is
not yet implemented.
Each directory is evaluated independently.
.PP
The prune list built into
.BR ptolemy (1)
handles common system directories
.RI ( proc ,
.IR sys ,
.IR dev ,
.IR .git ,
.IR __pycache__ ,
etc.) without requiring a
.IR .ptolemyignore .
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ptolemy (1),
.BR fnmatch (3)
.\"
.SH AUTHORS
Cody Michael Allison.
Ainulindale / SMNNIP research programme.
